As we continue our consideration
of the promises of peace
in Isaiah’s prophecies,
I’d like you to imagine
an Israelite living in Babylon.
Now, he’s just learned
that Jews can return to Jerusalem
and help to rebuild the temple.
So he must decide
if he and his family will leave Babylon
to make the long trip to his homeland.
What might he consider?
Well, after 70 years,
the land must have changed.
Fields would be overgrown with weeds.
Wolves, leopards, lions, and bears
must freely walk in the fields.
Snakes make their home there.
So he might ask himself:
‘Will my domestic animals
be killed by predators?
‘Will my small children be bitten by snakes?
And what about the danger of fierce men
attacking us on the journey home?’
Well, any such fears could be dispelled
by considering the prophecy at Isaiah 11:6-9.
Let’s read that together.
Isaiah chapter 11
—and notice this promise of peace—
starting in verse 6:
“The wolf will reside for a while
with the lamb,
“and with the young goat
the leopard will lie down,
“and the calf and the lion
and the fattened animal will all be together;
“and a little boy will lead them.
“The cow and the bear will feed together,
“and their young will lie down together.
“The lion will eat straw like the bull.
“The nursing child
will play over the lair of a cobra,
“and a weaned child will put his hand
over the den of a poisonous snake.
“They will not cause any harm or any ruin
“in all my holy mountain,
“because the earth will certainly be filled
with the knowledge of Jehovah
as the waters cover the sea.”
What a beautiful promise of peace!
Jews wouldn’t need to fear
wild animals or fierce men
on their journey home
or in their restored land.
With these poetic words,
Jehovah assured the exiles
that they and their livestock would be safe.
He would bless them with peace.
And did you notice, according to verse 7,
that the lion would symbolically eat straw,
illustrating that lions
wouldn’t kill the Jews’ cattle?
Faithful ones would have nothing to fear
from animal or human predators.
Do we see this prophecy
being fulfilled in our day?
Not with the literal animals,
but we do see a spiritual fulfillment.
Notice again, the end of verse 9.
It says: “The earth will certainly be filled
with the knowledge of Jehovah.”
Now, does the knowledge of Jehovah
change the behavior of animals?
No, but the knowledge of God
does change people.
In our day, the knowledge of Jehovah
helps people who are violent
to transform their personality
and become peaceable.
In harmony with Colossians 3:10,
these ones have ‘clothed themselves
with the new personality.’
They’ve stripped off
animalistic, violent tendencies
and transformed their lives
in harmony with what the Bible teaches.
They get along peaceably with others.
Perhaps you know someone
who made such changes.
Or perhaps you made these changes,
leaving behind a violent way of life.
Let me share with you such an experience.
A man named José
was trained in the martial arts
and in the use of weapons.
He had broken the law so many times
that he was brought to trial on 22 counts
and sentenced to 20 years in prison.
He was so violent
that even fellow inmates were afraid of him,
and he was kept in a high-security cell.
For seven years, his fleshly sister,
who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
visited him.
But he always rejected the Bible’s message.
In time, though,
he accepted one of our publications,
and a Bible study was started.
Right away,
he made tremendous changes in his conduct.
One week later,
he gave a personal witness to 200 prisoners
and the following week to 600 more.
He even received permission
to visit the inmates in other prison blocks.
Well, because of the remarkable change
in his behavior,
his sentence was reduced to 15 years.
However, after serving just ten years,
he was released from prison.
José was eventually baptized
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
truly a case
of ‘the wolf residing with the lamb.’
And what about the future fulfillment
of Isaiah 11:6-9?
In the earthly Paradise
that God has promised,
there will be delightful peace among humans
and between humans and animals.
Don’t you long for that time?
As you watch the following video,
notice the peace we enjoy
with fellow believers now
and just imagine the peace
that we’ll enjoy in Paradise.
How would you feel during a long journey
where you might meet
wild animals and criminals along the road?
Jehovah assured the returning exiles
that they would return
in safety and dwell in peace.
In the spiritual paradise we enjoy right now,
people who were once violent
have learned to be humble,
loving, and peaceable.
Imagine the peace
that will reign in God’s new world,
where we can wander this beautiful globe,
explore every corner,
and admire the handiwork of the true God
with no fear.
“‘They will do no harm nor cause any ruin
in all my holy mountain,’ says Jehovah.”
As the video showed,
people who were once violent
have learned to be
humble, loving, and peaceable.
And how did you feel
when you saw scenes in the video
of humans so close to wild animals?
Jehovah’s promise of peace among humans
and peace between humans and animals
is thrilling!
Please notice
what Isaiah further wrote about this peace
at Isaiah chapter 65.
Please turn there with me
—Isaiah 65.
Now, these are words similar to those
we read earlier in Isaiah chapter 11.
Isaiah 65:25:
“‘The wolf and the lamb will feed together,
“‘the lion will eat straw just like the bull,
“‘and the serpent’s food will be dust.
“‘They will do no harm nor cause any ruin
in all my holy mountain,’ says Jehovah.”
Skilled artists in the Art Department
at world headquarters
beautifully illustrate such scenes,
and the images can be found
in our publications.
But what Isaiah describes
is no artist’s rendition.
This will be real.
Think how you’ll feel
when you’re not afraid of wild animals
and the animals aren’t afraid of you.
As we look forward
to that future promise of peace,
what can we do now to pursue peace?
One thing is to contribute
to the peace of our spiritual paradise,
the secure,
spiritually prosperous environment
in which we worship Jehovah.
Jesus stated at Matthew 5:9:
“Happy are the peacemakers.”
A peacemaker is skilled
at restoring peace among brothers
when peace is disturbed.
But more important,
a peacemaker strives
to avoid disturbing peace in the first place.
Does “peacemaker” describe you?
Are you contributing
to our spiritual paradise in that way?
Something else we can do
as we await the future fulfillment
of the wolf and the lamb feeding together
is to meditate on what it will be like
to help resurrected ones who were violent
to become peaceable.
Imagine studying with a resurrected one
who had a violent background,
who perhaps experienced a violent death
because of a fierce personality.
How will you reason with the person
from God’s Word
to help him see the need to be a peacemaker?
What examples of such transformations
will you share?
And how will you explain
the prophecies of peace
at Isaiah chapter 11, verses 6 through 9
and chapter 65, verse 25?
We encourage all of you to think deeply
about how this promise of peace
was fulfilled for the ancient Jews,
how the promise is being fulfilled today,
and what life on earth will be like
when it’s fulfilled in the future.
May all of us take delight
in the peaceful promise
of the wolf and the lamb feeding together.
Brother James Mantz,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium,
“Take Delight in God’s Promises of Peace
—‘No Resident Will Say: “I am Sick.”’”